Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this lab we’ll get some practice configuring
static routes on Cisco routers.
Actually, there are going to be two labs for
Day 11 of this course.
This first one, where you will configure static
routes, and then the next one where you will
troubleshoot an already-configured network
that has some problems.
Anyway, in this lab, we want to configure
the network to allow PC1 and PC2 to ping eachother.
I haven’t done any pre-configurations on
these devices at all, so we have to go in
and configure the hostnames, IP addresses,
etc. first.
I chose not to do any preconfigurations so
that you can get some extra practice with
the basics, as repetition is very important
in getting used to using the CLI!
So, let’s do the basic configurations each
device as instructed in step 1.
I’ll start on PC1 first...click on config,
and the first thing we should configure is
the gateway here.
This is the address to which PC1 will forward
packets which are destined for a location
outside of the local network.
PC1’s gateway is R1, so I’ll put in R1’s
IP address, 192.168.1.254.
Next, click on fastethernet0, which is PC1’s
network interface, and type in the IP address
here, 192.168.1.1, and if you hit tab it automatically
fills in the subnet mask for this class C
address, 255.255.255.0. Then, exit out.
Now, don’t worry about configuring the switches.
If you want you can go in and turn off unused
interfaces, set interface descriptions, etc
for extra practice, but I think you’ll get
plenty of practice just by configuring the
routers.
So, let’s go on R1 next….from the CLI,
I’ll use enable to enter privileged exec
mode.
Then, configure terminal to enter global config
Now, let’s set the hostname with this command:
HOSTNAME R1.
Next I’ll configure the interfaces.
First, G0/1 which is connected to the internal
LAN.
INTERFACE G0/1.
Let’s set the IP address.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.1.254 255.255.255.0.
And how about a description?
DESCRIPTION ## to SW1 ##. Finally, let’s
enable it.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Next, the G0/0 interface connected to R2.
INTERFACE G0/0.
I’ll set the IP address.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.12.1 255.255.255.0.
Next, the description.
DESCRIPTION ## to R2 ##. And let’s enable
it.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay, let’s check on the interfaces.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Okay, you can see the IP addresses we configured.
G0/1 is up/up, but G0/0 is up/down.
That’s not a problem, it’s just because
R2’s G0/0 interface is still shutdown.
Now let’s go on R2...enter privileged exec
mode with ENABLE.
Then CONFIGURE TERMINAL.
Set the hostname.
HOSTNAME R2.
Next I’ll configure G0/0 which is connected
to R1.
INTERFACE G0/0.
Set the IP address.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.12.2 255.255.255.0.
Then the description.
DESCRIPTION ## to R1 ##. Now let’s enable
it.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay, now i’ll do the same on G0/1.
INTERFACE G0/1.
IP ADDRESSS 192.168.13.2 255.255.255.0.
DESCRIPTION ## to R3 ##. NO SHUTDOWN. Okay, let’s check on the interfaces.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Like we saw on R1 before, this interface is
UP/DOWN because R3’s interface is still
disabled, but the rest looks okay.
Okay next let’s go on R3...enter privileged exec
mode with ENABLE.
Then CONFIGURE TERMINAL.
Set the hostname.
HOSTNAME R3.
I’ll configure G0/0 which is connected to
R2.
INTERFACE G0/0.
Set the IP address.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.13.3 255.255.255.0.
Then the description.
DESCRIPTION ## to R2 ##. Finally, enable it.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay, let’s do the same steps on G0/1.
INTERFACE G0/1.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.3.254 255.255.255.0.
DESCRIPTION ## to SW2 ##. NO SHUTDOWN.
Let’s check the interfaces status.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Okay, looks good, and the interfaces we configured
are both up/up.
Finally, I’ll configure PC2...click config,
then set the gateway here, which should be
R3’s IP address.
192.168.3.254.
Then click on fastethernet0, and set the IP
address here.
192.168.3.1, and hit tab to auto-fill the
subnet mask.
Okay, so we’ve done the preconfigurations,
just some review of basic commands for practice.
Now let’s get to the main point of this
lab, configuring static routes.
Before starting, let’s think about what
static routes we’ll have to configure.
We need two-way reachability, so PC1’s ping
can reach PC2, and then PC2’s reply can
reach PC1.
R1 is already connected to the 192.168.1.0/24
network, so it just needs a route to 192.168.3.0/24.
Likewise, R3 is already connected to 192.168.3.0/24,
so it just needs a route to 192.168.1.0/24.
R2, however, is not connected to either of
those networks, so it will need routes to
both.
So, that means a total of four routes need
to be configured.
One each on R1 and R3, and two on R2.
Let’s go on R1 and configure the first of
the routes.
We have to be in global config mode, so I’ll
type exit to get out of interface config mode.
Configure the route with this command, IP
ROUTE, and let’s use the context sensistive
help to check the options.
So, it says destination prefix, meaning the
network address, which is 192.168.3.0.
Use the context-sensitive help again, and
next is the mask, which is 255.255.255.0,
since it's /24.
Next, we can specify the ‘forwarding router’s
address’, which is the IP address of the
next-hop router, or we can specify the exit
interface, all of these options are interface
types.
I’ll specify the next-hop address of R2,
which is 192.168.12.2.
If I use context-sensitive help again, you
can see there is another possible option,
distance metric for this route.
I’ll talk about this option in a later video,
but this CR down here means we can just enter
the command as is.
Okay, now let’s check out R1’s routing table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
There’s the static route we configured,
as indicated by the S here.
You can also see the configured and local
routes for R1’s two interfaces.
Remember, the local route is the actual address
configured on the interface, with a /32 mask
so it specifies just that single address,
and then the connected route is the network
address of the network the interface is connected
to.
Okay, R1’s route is done, let’s go on
R2.
Again, exit to get out of interface configuration
mode.
Let’s configure the route to 192.168.1.0/24.
IP ROUTE 192.168.1.0 255.255.255.0, and then
just to practice the other option I’ll specify
the exit interface instead of the next-hop
IP address.
G0/0.
This message comes up, but you can ignore
it.
It says ‘if not a point-to-point interface.
However, this is a point-to-point interface,
meaning it connects only to one other device.
This is different than, for example, many
routers connected to a single switch, which
we would call a shared segment.
Anyway, don’t worry about that for now.  You can just ignore this message.
Okay, next lets configure the route to 192.168.3.0/24.
IP ROUTE 192.168.3.0 255.255.255.0, and this
time let’s do the next-hop IP address.
192.168.13.3.
Okay, let’s check the routing table.  DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, here are the two static routes, and
the connected and local routes for each interface.
Looks good.
Finally, let’s configure R3’s static route.
Type EXIT to get out of interface config mode,
and let’s configure a route
to 192.168.1.0/24.
IP ROUTE 192.168.1.0 255.255.255.0 192.168.13.2,
setting R2 as the next-hop.
Let’s check the routing table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, looks good, one static route and the
connected and local routes for each interface.
Now, let’s go on PC1 and try out that ping...click
on desktop, then command prompt.
Okay, so this is the moment of truth.
The first ping might fail due to ARP, address
resolution protocol, but once ARP is finished
the rest of the pings should work if we configured
everything correctly.
Let’s try.
PING 192.168.3.1.
Okay, looks like PC1 is able to reach PC2,
and PC2 is able to reach PC1 with its reply.
We have successfully configured static routing.
That’s all for this lab.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.